Sun equipment grant
--------------------------

http://www.acclinet.com/tech_grant_app.asp

then I will edit and submit.  One question is how greedy we want to
be.  A T5140, which supports 128 threads, has a list price of $40K.  A
T1000 supporting 32 threads, is $5K.  I suggest we ask for a high-end
machine but explain how even a T1 would be very helpful.



Describe yourself or the organization you represent in 200 words or
less:

I am an assistant professor in the Department of Computer Science at the University of New Hampshire, the flagship public research university in the state.  I lead the artificial intelligence research group, which includes both undergraduate and graduate students who are interested in learning about and conducting research in the field of AI.  Our teaching and research focuses on developing and testing new algorithms to tackle the most computationally demanding tasks in AI, including planning, scheduling, bioinformatics, combinatorial optimization, and constraint satisfaction.  All of these tasks are highly compute-bound.  Our research approach centers on the use of techniques from machine learning to develop adaptive and robust algorithms for optimization and combinatorial search.  We would like to mount a new initiative in exploiting parallelism and massive multi-threading in combinatorial search.  UNH has a long history in parallel computing, continued today in work such as the use of the Cell microprocessor architecture.

Describe the type of equipment you're seeking in 200 words or less:

We are approaching Acclinet because of our belief that the Sun Niagara architecture represents the best currently-available instantiation of the kind of machines that the multi-core revolution will bring to the desktops of tomorrow.  We aim to develop algorithms that will scale gracefully as the number of cores and the number of threads per core increase.  To do this, we need a highly parallel machine, such as the Sun T5140.  The clock speed, memory size, or disk size is not particularly important to us - we seek the largest number of parallel threads possible.  If a T5140 is outside the scope of the Acclinet Technology Grant program, we would still welcome a smaller Niagara machine - even a T1000 would allow us to surpass the dual quad-core Intel machines that we currently use, and would be a great help.


Describe why you need the equipment in no more than 600 words:

As is well known, processor clock speed has reached a plateau and subsequent generations of machines are going to rely on thread-level parallelism instead of processor cycles for increased performance. In order to make efficient use of this upcoming hardware, the artificial intelligence community must start now to create algorithms that can make use of concurrency between multiple CPU cores.

Heuristic search is one of the most fundamental tools used in the field of artificial intelligence.  It is used for path planning in robotics and video games, task planning and job scheduling, natural language parsing, constraint satisfaction and system configuration, sequence alignment in bioinformatics, and many other combinatorial optimization problems.  Today, the most prominent heuristic search algorithms are sequential; they only make use of a single processor core. In order to adapt the field of artificial intelligence to the next generation of computers, we must reformulate search algorithms so that they can take advantage of parallel computing on multi-core machines.

Our new initiative builds on AI work done in the 1980s on parallel algorithms for SIMD and distributed machines, but we are addressing the machines that are likely to appear in the near future, with hundreds of CPU cores on a single chip, all accessing the same memory space.  We are working on algorithms that minimize memory contention while spreading the work out among cores as efficiently as possible. Our current approach is unique in that it splits up the search space based on the quality of potential solutions, instead of giving equal attention to less desirable sections.  To bring this effort to fruition, we would like the implement the method and test it on real hardware, preferably massively multi-threaded hardware such as Sun's.  We are committed to open-source software and our empirical methodology, which involves tens of thousands of benchmarking experiments, takes full advantage of the capabilities of Unix-like operating systems to process and store large quantities of data.  In fact, it is our understanding that our filesystem has the most inodes of any on the UNH campus.

The use of this equipment would not limited to this single project, however.  We are also interested in researching the parallelization of other artificial intelligence algorithms for bioinformatics, reinforcement learning, and more.  Having the equipment on hand will encourage group members to pursue these avenues.  We would also provide access to the equipment for the programming language research group, which has been exploring issues in parallel Java run-times.

In addition, the equipment would benefit the department and university as a whole by providing a resource for the other researchers at UNH who are interested in parallel computing.  A massively multi-threaded machine would also be useful as a part of our many demonstration and outreach programs that attract new students and educate local high school students.  UNH Computer Science also runs an annual High Tech Camp during the summer.


How did you find out about the Acclinet Technology Grant Program?

Email from Michael Kalil, forwarded by the CS department.


# EOF